Document URL support in MBS (#2395)
metabrainz/musicbrainz-server: HACKING-URL.md

Introduction
============

> This file contains instructions on how to deal with feature requests for
> supporting new URL domains in MusicBrainz, or to change how they are currently
> supported.

Reviewer: * This file is rather descriptive than giving “instructions”.
* As is in this commit it rather describes the implementation of “how to deal with feature requests”; It could be useful to document the workflow for STYLE/MBS URL relationship types and lyrics/otherdatabases whitelists.
* With the exception of lyrics pages and other databases, there is generally no need of any kind of “URL domain support in MusicBrainz” for editors to add external links to new domains or even to domains that don’t exist yet. That’s why I have been using “handle” rather than “support” in commit messages for a long time.
* I suggest adding a short list of things that people may want to implement here instead of the list of how things are organized in our code you provided in the next paragraph.

```suggestion
This file describes how to implement specific handlers for external websites in MusicBrainz Server to: improve the display of links on MusicBrainz website; make it easier to add links; block unwanted links.
```

Reviewer: I was thinking about blocking URL shorteners (in `externalLinks.js`) and deep-linked images (and BC profiles and whatnot in `URLCleanup.js`).

Our URL support has three main parts: cleanup, favicons and sidebar display.
Often you will want to add all three, but in some cases you might only want

> to display the links more prominently without cleaning them up, or vice versa.

Reviewer: * On “cleanup”: The current name “URLCleanup” of the file is misleading: It is more broad than that as you know and described in the next section. I suggest to use “editing handler” (or any other suggestion?) instead here.
* On “favicons and sidebar display”: The pretty name and the scheme override are missing from this list. Those could all be grouped under the same part “external links display”.

Reviewer: The suggestion for “editing handler” didn’t come out of nowhere. The term “handle” has been massively used about URLs/external links in both [pull requests](https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pulls?q=is%3Apr+handle) and [tickets](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20MBS%20AND%20component%20in%20(%22URL%20cleanup%22)%20AND%20text%20~%20handle) for a long time.

Author: Sure :) You had said back then you were going to make a bunch of changes, that's why I didn't touch this further :) But I can change it myself if you prefer.

for how to request such STYLE decision,
before even thinking about coding handlers.

Other relationship types don’t require any STYLE decision,
but having a self-assigned MBS ticket is still required.

The following research work is usually expected about external websites to be handled:

* Form and number of its URLs in the MusicBrainz database already;
  - Tip: For a first approximate count, you can query the MusicBrainz API about URLs with (approximate) patterns;
  - For example [`url:*/openlibrary.org/*`](https://musicbrainz.org/ws/2/url?query=url:*/openlibrary.org/*&limit=1&fmt=json) counts Open Library URLs (mainly).

* Mapping between patterns of its URLs and MusicBrainz entities with relationship type(s);
  - For example `/authors/` Open Library URLs match MusicBrainz artists.

* Potential alternative forms of its URLs;
  - For example `youtu.be/REF` is an alias for `www.youtube.com/watch?v=REF`.

* Potentially unneeded query (`?...&...`) and fragment (`#...`);
  - For example `&list=...` is removed from YouTube video URLs taken from a playlist.

* Potential patterns to be blocked (unmappable URLs, unreliable URLs such as search pages...);

>   - For example `whosampled.com/sample` URLs have no equivalent in MusicBrainz and blocked with a message.

Author: ```suggestion
  - For example `whosampled.com/sample` URLs have no equivalent in MusicBrainz and are blocked with a message.
```

in `entitySpecificRules` yet, just add a new `entitySpecificRules.entity_type`
function based on the existing ones.

URL display handlers
--------------------

### Favicons

For a favicon to be displayed by the URLs of the domain you are adding, you
should add the file as a PNG (preferably sized 32x32, but 16x16 is also
acceptable if that’s all you can find) to
[`root/static/images/external-favicons`](root/static/images/external-favicons).
Try to just extract the favicon directly from the site source code and convert
it as needed, unless the site officially provides the files for download.

For URLs to actually be mapped to the favicon you’ve added, you also
need to add the mapping to `FAVICON_CLASSES` in
[`root/static/scripts/common/constants.js`](root/static/scripts/common/constants.js).
Then add the favicon to the list in
[`root/static/styles/favicons.less`](root/static/styles/favicons.less):
use the favicon class you added in the previous step, and pass a second
argument `32` if the favicon file is 32x32 rather than 16x16.

### Sidebar display

:warning:
The MVC pattern is bent here as the names displayed for hyperlinks are coded in

> the entity model layer. Plans are to address this issue tracked with the ticket

Author: ```suggestion
the entity model layer. Plans to address this issue are tracked with the ticket
```

The Developer’s Guide to implementing URL handlers in the MusicBrainz Server
============================================================================

This file describes how to implement specific handlers for external websites in
MusicBrainz Server to: allow linking to other databases and lyrics website,
make it easier to add links, prevent editor from entering wrong links,
improve the display of links on MusicBrainz website.

For easy starting, look at similar

> [resolved MBS "URL cleanup" tickets](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20MBS%20AND%20component%20%3D%20%22URL%20cleanup%22%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Closed%20AND%20resolution%20IN%20%28Done%2CFixed%29)

Reviewer: It’s written in the description of the ticket: “Even the MBS component in Jira should be renamed.” There is no rush.

which have comments linking to pull requests. More particularly,
look at potential STYLE tickets linked to these MBS tickets,
and at the commit messages in the pull requests. Do the same.

> If any doubt, get back to this guide which should contain the answer.

Author: "If any doubt" is not proper English AFAIK :) The first one is just a lot nicer than the second, which feels like a strict boss giving orders to me :D But that might just be me, hence giving two options.

> If any doubt, get back to this guide which should contain the answer.

Reviewer: > "If any doubt" is not proper English AFAIK :) 

Sorry about that. Can we use the shorter “When in doubt” here?

> feels like a strict boss giving orders to me :D

I didn’t see it that way but now that you write it, “get back to this guide” is probably the main part that can give this feeling.

----

Based on your two points, by combining my above suggestion with your first suggestion:

```suggestion
When in doubt, you will hopefully find an answer in this guide.
```

> If any doubt, get back to this guide which should contain the answer.

Author: I guess that might work? :)

Our URL handling has two main parts: editing handlers (unwanted URL block, URL
cleanup, relationship type autoselection, relationship validation), and
display handlers (with favicons, in relationship lists, in the sidebar).

Table of Contents
-----------------

<!-- toc -->

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [URL editing handlers](#url-editing-handlers)
  * [Cleanup](#cleanup)
  * [Autoselection](#autoselection)
  * [Validation](#validation)
  * [Supporting new relationship types](#supporting-new-relationship-types)
  * [Entity-wide rules](#entity-wide-rules)
- [URL display handlers](#url-display-handlers)
  * [Favicons](#favicons)
  * [Sidebar display](#sidebar-display)
  * [Rendered scheme override](#rendered-scheme-override)
  * [Custom in-page display](#custom-in-page-display)
  * [Miscellaneous display customization](miscellaneous-display-customization)

<!-- tocstop -->

Prerequisites
-------------

Allowing to link external websites as
either [other databases](https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Other_Databases_Relationship_Type/Whitelist) (for persistence issues)
or [lyrics websites](https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Style/Relationships/URLs/Lyrics_whitelist) (for license issues)

> must be approved by a STYLE decision beforehand.

Reviewer: Those rather belong to the style documentation.

See <https://musicbrainz.org/doc/Proposals>
for how to request such STYLE decision,
before even thinking about coding handlers.

Other relationship types don’t require any STYLE decision,

> but having a self-assigned MBS ticket is still required.

Reviewer: You are correct, but this is implicit for any contribution. So I don’t think it is needed to expand this again. It might even seem to be not very welcoming.

> but having a self-assigned MBS ticket is still required.

Author: I'm fine with keeping it as-is if you think it sounds scary rather than welcoming them to the team environment :)

> The following research work is usually expected about external websites to be handled:

Reviewer: *   It’s a technical documentation that applies to us too.
*   Your additions in parenthesis are redundant with the paragraph that follows the list.

> The following research work is usually expected about external websites to be handled:

Author: Yes, and if we read the list, then we also expect us to do that :) The point is that we are supposed to not talk like an impersonal business machine.

Fine about the parentheses, I think I noticed that later but forgot to change this.

* Form and number of its URLs in the MusicBrainz database already;
  - Tip: For a first approximate count, you can query the MusicBrainz API about URLs with (approximate) patterns;

>   - For example [`url:*/openlibrary.org/*`](https://musicbrainz.org/ws/2/url?query=url:*/openlibrary.org/*&limit=1&fmt=json) counts Open Library URLs (mainly).

Reviewer: It is not intended to be “formal”, just concise, especially not to lengthen prerequisites too much. Can we add these details when we get to the section about editing handlers?

Semi-colons in lists are very common. See [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punctuation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punctuation) for example.

>   - For example [`url:*/openlibrary.org/*`](https://musicbrainz.org/ws/2/url?query=url:*/openlibrary.org/*&limit=1&fmt=json) counts Open Library URLs (mainly).

Author: We don't get charged by the word, why not be explanatory and clear rather than concise? We want a new person reading this to understand why we do things and have an easy way to do them.

* Mapping between patterns of its URLs and MusicBrainz entities with relationship type(s);
  - For example `/authors/` Open Library URLs match MusicBrainz artists.

* Potential alternative forms of its URLs;
  - For example `youtu.be/REF` is an alias for `www.youtube.com/watch?v=REF`.

* Potential query (`?...`) and fragment (`#...`);

>   - For example `&list=...` is removed from YouTube video URLs taken from a playlist.

Reviewer: Rephrased the parent item in commit c2d6111 instead.

>   - For example `&list=...` is removed from YouTube video URLs taken from a playlist.

Author: But isn't it good to give rationales for why we actually do this?

* Potential patterns to be blocked (search pages, unreliable URLs...);

>   - For example `youtube.com/playlist` URLs are unwanted and blocked with a message.

Reviewer: Good catch, but I would prefer to stick to simple examples. Changed it in commit cc59ce2.

* Rationale and real examples for all the above.

Expected behavior and rationale should be given in the ticket,
and implementation details in the pull request and commit messages.

It isn’t required to make a fine-grained implementation.

> Sometimes it is even impossible because of URL patterns.

Reviewer: I have been intentionally vague about what  “a fine-grained implementation” is. It is way more general than just the validation. It is about everything in this document.

> It isn’t required to make a fine-grained implementation.
> Sometimes it is even impossible because of URL patterns.

Author: Then maybe just:

```suggestion
You don't always have to write a fine-grained implementation that looks at every single detail.
In fact, sometimes it is not even possible to do so, for example because the URL patterns
are not distinctive and do not allow for very precise validation.
```

I want to make sure it's not read as "you can just do some lazy thing and not even look at half this stuff" though :D

> Sometimes it is even impossible because of URL patterns.

Reviewer: > "you can just do some lazy thing and not even look at half this stuff"

This is pretty much what I meant. There is no need to make a full-fledged implementation for every website. It mostly depends on the level of involvement of the contributor. It has always been. 

That reminds me that there is at least one exception to this in the case where the site is linked using a restricted relationship type; Then it requires a full-fledged implementation otherwise the restriction would not make sense any longer.

> Sometimes it is even impossible because of URL patterns.

Reviewer: The “exception” is “the case where the site is linked using a restricted relationship type” as in [`RESTRICTED_LINK_TYPES`](https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/blob/v-2023-01-10-hotfixes/root/static/scripts/edit/URLCleanup.js#L300-L327); which indeed “requires a full-fledged implementation” (relationship type autoselection, URL cleanup/normalization, relationship validation, sidebar display).

I’m fine with removing this paragraph altogether as it doesn’t add much.

> Sometimes it is even impossible because of URL patterns.

Author: Fine with just removing it.

URL editing handlers
--------------------

Most of the handling of URLs, including all three of (URL) cleanup,
(relationship type) autoselect and (URL relationship) validation, happen on
[`root/static/scripts/edit/URLCleanup.js`](root/static/scripts/edit/URLCleanup.js).
(Note: The name of this file is historical and will be changed in the future;

> See [MBS-12836](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/browse/MBS-12836).)

Reviewer: One issue at a time.
The reason we didn’t already do is mentioned in the description of the ticket MBS-12836: “it will conflict with a lot of ongoing work.” And there is a huge pile of work in progress here, not even counting the changes I did not push as PR yet. In terms of refactoring, we already have the entity type category naming in progress.

> See [MBS-12836](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/browse/MBS-12836).)

Author: Ok, but then what's the point of saying this in the file? We can change the file when we change the rest and it shouldn't confuse anyone :/

Not a huge issue either way, just not sure of the usefulness of it.

> See [MBS-12836](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/browse/MBS-12836).)

Reviewer: It is just documenting a known issue in the code naming convention, and this file is about coding conventions among other things.

As it seems to be too much information, I removed it in commit https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2395/commits/fcde0caea430705db2d4b1957b26295baf420752.
The ticket can be found indirectly anyway since there is also a link to the Jira component “URL cleanup” in the introduction.

need to add the mapping to `FAVICON_CLASSES` in
[`root/static/scripts/common/constants.js`](root/static/scripts/common/constants.js).
Then add the favicon to the list in
[`root/static/styles/favicons.less`](root/static/styles/favicons.less):
use the favicon class you added in the previous step, and pass a second
argument `32` if the favicon file is 32x32 rather than 16x16.

### Sidebar display

:warning:
The MVC pattern is bent here as the names displayed for hyperlinks are coded in
the entity model layer. Plans are to address this issue tracked with the ticket
[MBS-10605](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/browse/MBS-10605).

For a domain to be displayed on the sidebar, you’ll need to create an URL model
in [`lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Entity/URL/`](lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Entity/URL/).
Base your model on any of the existing ones that are known to go by the same
types of relationship, and name it after the site in question.

The `sidebar_name` method most often returns a simple untranslated string,
the name of the site. You can also return a translated string, most often when:
* The name of the site has official localizations, for example `l(Niconico)`;

> * The site is mainly about streaming, for example `l('Stream at YouTube Music')`;

Author: I'd argue this is more about when we specifically want to specify what you'd go to the page for, but it's strange since we don't say "Buy at $store" (maybe we should!). The whole thing is weird and should either never be done or always be done IMO, but maybe you're right (re: the warning below) that just grouping these with "stream at" instead would be good enough.

Reviewer: It seems that you answered your own interrogation already.

* The site is about scores, even for just some paths, for example the more

>   complex method in [IMSLP](lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Entity/URL/IMSLP.pm).

Author: IIRC the main reason we did this is because we thought people might not even know wtf IMSLP is and why they should go there so we specify? But this is actually strange again because we don't do the same for lyrics, even though I wouldn't know half the lyrics sites we link to are lyrics sites...

Reviewer: Same as above.

:warning:
The two latter cases are temporary fallbacks to the lack of display layout;
Instead plans are to smartly group external links by relationship type;
See [MBS-10605](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/browse/MBS-10605) again.

For your shiny new URL model to be actually used when loading URLs, you also
need to add the mapping to `%URL_SPECIALIZATIONS` in
[`MusicBrainz::Server::Data::URL`](lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Data/URL.pm).

### Rendered scheme override

There are mainly two reasons for overriding URL scheme (`http`/`https`) on
display:

If the external site supports both `http` and `https` schemes,
then override the method `url_is_scheme_independent` with `{ 1 }`
in the corresponding `Entity` model added for sidebar display.
That way, the URL scheme will match the scheme of the MusicBrainz Server
instance (`https` for `musicbrainz.org`, usually `http` for mirrors).
See [InternetArchive](lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Entity/URL/InternetArchive.pm) for example.

> If the external site dropped support for `http` scheme or redirect from `http`

Author: ```suggestion
If the external site has dropped support for the `http` scheme or redirects from `http`
```

> to `https`, and its URLs stored in the MusicBrainz database still use `http`

Author: ```suggestion
to `https`, but its URLs stored in the MusicBrainz database still use `http`
```

> (for example to keep following the permalink format),

Author: Maybe be more specific about the cases (AFAICT there's just two?) 

```suggestion
(because they have not been updated yet, or because the site has an official permalink format that uses `http`),
```

Reviewer: Applied suggestion with line break in commit https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2395/commits/f3a8b09820f4ea52ba6cda536373eedf22421a75.

Author: I guess you mean https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2395/commits/332b031d17903cfe5c28018a7735cc36ee84d197 but thanks anyway!

then override the method `href_url` to make the appropriate change;
That way, the URL scheme will be systematically overridden accordingly.
See [VIAF](lib/MusicBrainz/Server/Entity/URL/VIAF.pm) for example.

### Custom in-page display

All external links are shown under the “Relationships” tab of entity pages.

> You will notice that some very rare websites (Amazon, IMSLP, VIAF, Wikidata...)

Reviewer: Precisely 3%. The wording also relates to the same conversation about deprecating per-website relationship types.

> You will notice that some very rare websites (Amazon, IMSLP, VIAF, Wikidata...)

Author: Sure, but "very rare" sounds to me like the websites themselves are rare (but Amazon and Wikidata for example are some of our most common links) :) Hence the suggestion.

> You will notice that some very rare websites (Amazon, IMSLP, VIAF, Wikidata...)

Reviewer: I didn’t see it that way, thank you.

have a custom `pretty_name` for URL display here. These websites actually have
dedicated relationship types which names are used as label ahead of the URL so
that the identifier contained in the URL can be shown instead of the full URL.

> So it is pointless to have a custom `pretty_name` for other websites.

Reviewer: Maybe it should instead be moved after the next paragraph that is discussed in the above conversation.

> So it is pointless to have a custom `pretty_name` for other websites.

Author: Maybe? Dunno. In any case, I can perfectly well imagine having another URL type where we want to display just the ID, so I don't think we should say it will always be pointless.

> So it is pointless to have a custom `pretty_name` for other websites.

Reviewer: I’m not sure to follow your comment. What do you mean with “another URL type”?

Should it be clarified that “other websites” refer to sites that do not “have dedicated relationship types”?

> So it is pointless to have a custom `pretty_name` for other websites.

Author: Oh, so what you meant is "you shouldn't use this for stuff that does not have a dedicated relationship"? Yeah, in that case that seems sensible :)

Moreover the current dedicated relationship types are destined to be removed

> when generic relationship types can be used instead, for example all the

Reviewer: Really? I thought that it was agreed on for a long time. Never felt like my personal preference, it was grounded.

> when generic relationship types can be used instead, for example all the

Author: I've always been quite clear that I want to split all the relationships that we can autoselect (MBS-11938). IMO the best possible option would be to split the rels, *but* have a grouping option for them (so you could request all lyrics sites by requesting type: lyrics, but also request specific relationship types by requesting type: genius and whatnot).

> when generic relationship types can be used instead, for example all the

Reviewer: OK, I updated the ticket’s status accordingly and dropped this paragraph with commit https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2395/commits/f3a8b09820f4ea52ba6cda536373eedf22421a75.
